---
title: "First Retrospection"
date: 2019-06-09T08:24:53+02:00
draft: false
toc: false
images:
tags: 
  - introspection
---

I am trying different things at the moment about retro- or introspection for
myself. One thing that I know others are doing are weekly mails to all their
*directs*[^1]. I've also seen this via some form of
weekly blog post. My default working mode is **transparency** so why sending
mails to only a few select people when I can also just give them the link.
Whomever might be interested later might find this useful - or not.

So I'm giving this a try now.

## Challenges

I will first start with the challenges I faced this week.

Meetings continue to be too many. At this point I'm not sure if this is a
company wide problem or me being "new" to management and not saying **no**
enough. At one point this week I had a total of 10 meetings on one single day.
Obviously this is not sustainable.

A full-day offsite about the next big re-org was intense. On one hand simple
things like the acoustic in the room was difficult and on the other hand the
topic was very important. The discussions have been very productive and for now
the new structure makes sense to me. The devil is in the detail of course so
how all of this will be implemented is now crucial.

But also regarding the re-org I now for the first time I am not transparent
towards others. This is something I never really wanted to do but I do
acknowledge that sometimes it is better to not share information too early.
Everyone knows that the re-org will happen but the exact details are still
confidential.

## Highlights

There are a number of different initiatives right now that I feel all share the
same technical solution. This week we started a proposal on how to tackle this
in a more structured way instead of adding hack over hack. It is not yet
finished and far from being able to be implemented, but at least we now share
similar understanding of the possible solution.

I have learned about [multiplier and diminisher][0] type of leaders. It is
interesting how much a *lead*[^2] influences the team. A fairly recent episode
on the *Soft Skills Engineering* Podcast about
[fighting the imposter syndrome][2] resonated a lot with me. In my opinion
everyone is subject to it except for diminishing leads maybe. In a similar kind
of manner the episode about [hope and suffering][3] on the *Greater than Code*
Podcast was good. Essentially not everything is always great and suffering is
also an essential part of life.

[0]: https://medium.com/@mirceavlaicu/what-type-of-leader-are-you-a-multiplier-or-a-diminisher-1e2806428f6
[2]: https://softskills.audio/2019/03/25/episode-150-how-to-fight-imposter-syndrome-as-a-technical-lead-and-getting-in-to-meetups/
[3]: https://www.greaterthancode.com/hope-and-suffering

[^1]: I hate the term "direct" but I don't know a better one. If you know one, please reach out
[^2]: Not every *lead* is also a **leader**
