---
title: "My first year in Management"
date: 2019-08-04
lastmod: 2019-08-04T09:00:00+02:00
draft: false
toc: true
images:
tags: 
  - mgmt
  - introspection
---

About a year ago I transitioned into management. I changed my role from Senior
Software Developer to Engineering Lead in Zalando. In this post I want to share
my experience, good and bad, things that went well, where I screwed up and what
I'm taking from it.

## A difficult first year

As my manager put it in my performance review: the last year was one of my most
challenging ones. And he was right. In theory my game plan was pretty *simple*:
I became Engineering Lead for the team I was an engineer before. A well
functioning and I might say one of the most high performing teams I've ever
worked in. It did not take long though until the team dissolved itself. For one
member it was clear from the beginning that he would leave. But it did not take
long until the next engineer from this team said he would leave the company.
This was a real setback because I value him tremendously as an engineer and
enjoyed the interactions we had. Sadly he had made up his mind even before I
became manager and for me there was no way to keep him. Back then and still
today I was not under the impression that it was because of me transitioning.

## High level discussions

So there I was, left with a "team" of one engineer and another re-org about to
happen. This resulted in me being asked to take care of another team of 4
people. What was about to come was even worst. From a company perspective the
teams mandate, vision and mission was seen as too big and was supposed to be
shared between two teams, in different countries. The nature of the topic was
really complex and my technical background allowed me to judge that separating
this customer problem between multiple teams and components was a bad idea.

In result I spent most of my time discussing and arguing about this topic. The
team itself was doing fine in the day to day work and was working against our
goal. But at least the product specialist was worn out in the process. While I
as Engineering Lead was doing somewhat fine, because I had a team of experienced
engineers and research engineers, he was in the middle of the storm. He had to
deal with the day to day work but also providing the team with a product vision.
This was really difficult as some of the discussions were towards splitting
exactly this up between multiple teams. Eventually this product specialist also
left the company.

Even though some kind of decision and agreement was finally reached, a change in
top management rolled everything back. While this was some kind of roller
coaster ride in the end I believe we are in a better situation now.

## Classical traps

I also fell into some of the classical first-time-first-year manager traps.
Although I was not starting to micromanage, I might have been too hands-off for
the team. Similarly in the 1-on-1s I started I was too nice and wanted to dodge
the more serious and difficult conversations. Being too nice also had the
drawback of not providing enough feedback. In *Radical Candor* terms I was in
the **Ruinous Empathy** quadrant.

It took me some time until I became aware of this and started asking career or
difficult questions about work situations. And giving constant feedback is now
one of my top goals for my second year.

Another challenge for me was to start **saying no** more often. Starting in
management this seems to be the most classical trap to fall into. Prioritization
today continues to be a challenge I need to address more consciously. Similarly
to delegation. Instead of doing things on my own I'm now starting to consciously
delegate tasks and interesting learning opportunities.

## Some things were positive

But not all was bad and learning in baby steps. As I said before, I did not fall
into the micromanagement trap. This was mostly due to the fact that my teams are
mostly senior engineers and grown up people. I did not have to be the one
telling them each and every day what to do. And I do think that micromanagement
does not fit my personality and experience very well. My worst managers were
themselves micromanaging so why would I do this myself?

I started to spend some significant time with hiring. I did not count the number
of interviews I did but I was able to hire three new engineers to the teams.

I have also been able to further leverage my strengths like *technical
excellence*, *leading business* and *team up*. All Zalando terms for knowing
your technical craft, understanding business needs and being ego-less (or as I
like to put it: don't be a jerk).

## What have I learned and what do I want to work on?

There is a lot for me to tackle in my second year as a manager. I received the
feedback that I am sometimes an information sink and that status updates have to
be asked. This is no new feedback for me but in my new role I do need to find a
way to systematically share updates.

I also need to work on establishing, maintaining and improving team processes.
While one of my teams was somewhat reluctant to anything that looked to much
like "process" and "management" I do believe that a bit more process does help
for getting things done. I recently read that instead of naming this *process*
a better term could be *rituals*. Sounds small but worth a try.

Another team related topic is team identity. What makes my team a *team*? What
are its strengths, growth opportunities and aspirations?

My main learning though is the value of constant feedback. One of my main
mistakes was to not systematically check in about my report's development
progress and where they might need help or clarity. It's not like I did not have
this in mind before. But somehow I think dodging the difficult questions and not
talking about too uncomfortable stuff in 1-on-1s was a classical early
management trap I fell into.

And finally management is also about empowering people and delegation. This is
not easy to learn. When to delegate what to whom. I am learning some tools and
guidelines for delegation and now need to start applying them in my daily work.

So, here I go, off to my second year in management.
