---
title: "How to: Daniel"
date: 2019-06-10T16:00:00+02:00
draft: false
comments: false
images:
aliases:
  - "/manager-readme/"
---

# Purpose

In this document I am storing and collecting my preferred ways of working and
what is important to me. The idea is to help me reflect and to jump-start our
working relationship by giving you some information about me.

# My role

I am working as Engineering Manager in the Search and Discovery organisation. In
this role I am evaluated based on the expectations described in How to Excel as
Engineering Manager. It contains details about the five main themes of Business
Impact, Productivity, Team Health, Systems Health and Stakeholder happiness.

# My Principles

A number of principles have helped me in my career so far and got me to this
point. I am curious to see what will be added over time.

**Keep it Simple, ~~Stupid~~ Sherlock**. Simple things are easier to understand
and evolve. Simple things are easy to reason about. In contrast, complex things
are difficult to understand and invite for hero, 10x programmer anti-patterns.

**Make it work, make it right, make it fast**. Premature optimization is the
root of all evil. When we start working on something, we usually do not know the
domain and all the edge cases upfront. Only through solving a given problem we
truly understand it. Then, and only then, it is time to optimize the solution.

**Servant Leadership**. We are in this together and part of a larger group of
individuals. Together, as a group, we can be a lot greater than the sum of all
the parts. We can only win together and I want to help you get your job done.
This requires a high level of trust, empathy, humility, accountability, and
competence. Leadership is not a monopoly and the manager is not the only leader
in a team.

**Iteration**. Iterations are a magic and simple tool. They allow for planning
ahead, learning while doing, and reflecting on the good parts, and those that
need improvement. Iterations also enable focus. Through limiting the work in
progress in one iteration, quality increases and shipping stuff is actually
faster.

**Feedback***. Without feedback we cannot improve. As engineers we get constant
feedback from the test suite. As humans we need feedback from others to improve
ourselves. Getting feedback is a gift, providing feedback can move mountains
over time.

# What you can expect from me as your manager

**Context**. Most of my work day is centered around information gathering,
filtering and sharing. I’ll try to push as much information to you, but feel
free to ask about anything else.

**Cheer**. Success needs to be celebrated. Personal, but also team success. Tell
me when things go well, share what makes you proud, and I’ll make sure we
celebrate this.

**Firefight**. A mistake, if shared, becomes a challenge to learn from; if
hidden, becomes a failure. I am here to support you and us in learning from
mistakes.

# 1:1s

This meeting is for you and you are driving the agenda. The goal of the meeting
is to work on challenges, goals and priorities to support you playing out your
strengths. It is not the time for status updates, instead I want to support you
in the role you have and the goals you have set for yourself. Hopefully you
bring up [things you otherwise would not do][0] in a group setting.

Urgent matters should not wait for a 1:1.

# Communication

You can write emails and slack me anytime. I do the same. These systems are
created for the purpose of asynchronous communication. If you need an immediate
answer from me, please state this clearly upfront. Sometimes I work at night or
on weekends, when the kids are asleep and I’m able to focus. When I message you,
I never expect to get an answer from you at this time. I will mostly rely on
emails with Google’s scheduled sending feature when I’m communicating outside
office or working hours.

[0]: https://medium.com/@mrabkin/the-art-of-the-awkward-1-1-f4e1dcbd1c5c
