---
title: "Manager Readme"
date: 2019-06-10T16:00:00+02:00
draft: false
comments: false
images:
---

I'm am an Engineering Lead in the Search department at Zalando. I joined the
company in July 2016 and started as a senior Backend Engineer building the new
search infrastructure with my team.

I started working professionally in the Search domain in 2008 after I graduated
with a Diploma in Economics. In University the interest for Search started to
grow and I took courses building inverted indices from scratch.

Since then I have been working in Search related companies. Recently (in March
2018) I transitioned into Management and now try to not suck at it. In my
professional life I had good and bad managers which hopefully helps me reflect
on my performance.

## About me

Recently it became a thing in my *new* peer group to do all kinds of personality
tests. I start to see the value in some of them and I start to understand what
it means to focus development on strengths or weaknesses. In this section I'll
simply summarize my test results. They should help you getting a first glimpse
of me and may help you to help me manage some of my weaknesses.

The *Clifton Strength Finder* test shows that I am a learner, achiever, have
self assurance, develop relationships and I relate to people.

According to *16 Personalities* I am [*The Entertainer*][1]. My strengths are:
being bold, original, aesthetics and showmanship, practical, observant and have
excellent people skills. My weaknesses are: sensitive, conflict-averse, easily
bored, poor long-term planners, unfocused.

Some of these strengths I can related to, some of them I don't. One weakness
that I do see is being conflict-averse. Having difficult and tough conversations
is something I need to work on. Often I'm dodging them and try to get away with
it. Obviously this does not really help so if you see this happening, please
remind me.

## My Role

I am here to help you do the best work you can. My role mainly involves giving
context to the work you do and ensuring we are all rowing in the same direction.
I will make sure we follow the company's common procedures and best practices. I
also try to get obstacles out of your way and help resolve conflicts that might
arise within the team or between others outside of it.

I have a history in Engineering myself so I usually have opinions. Do not take
my opinions as an expectation on you. They may be rubbish, I might just be
brainstorming and spit balling ideas. I will challenge decisions you make and I
expect you challenge mine equally.

Finally I am here to help you advance in your career. Obviously I will try to
keep you advancing as much as I can in the teams that I lead. If you feel stuck,
we need to talk. I will try to develop a solution with you that might lead to an
outcome that also benefits the company.

## Feedback

Feedback is a crucial tool for me. As developer you constantly seek and get
feedback for your code through unit tests and maybe pair programming. It is not
that different when dealing with humans. Giving Feedback is an area I am trying
to improve myself in, though. I'm okay-ish addressing things that did not go
well but I'm not really good at giving positive feedback. If you see this
happening please remind me, ask for it and insist in getting it.

If you want to give me feedback, please feel free to always contact me. While I
generally prefer to talk in person I do understand that giving feedback is not
always easy. In Zalando you can always give me *Development Feedback* via the
Zonar tool. I would then take this feedback into our next 1-on-1 and address it.

## Schedule

My calendar is a nightmare *and* open for everyone. If a meeting or it's notes
contains information that is not public, you won't be able to see the details
and only that I am busy. All other rules still apply though.

Often times someone just adds an invite into my calendar. This means I sometimes
need to choose between multiple events. Most events unfortunately do not have a
clear agenda or a pre-read in the invite. This makes it hard for me to choose
the right meetings and leads to me maybe declining the wrong ones. If you need
my time then you increase the chance by adding an agenda and maybe even a
pre-read. If I decline your meeting but you really, really need to talk to me,
then ping me. We will figure something out.

If you have some super urgent topic, personal or work related but my calendar is
blocked, please contact me directly via chat or even phone. In general my
priority when it comes to meetings and time is *Incidents*, *1-on-1s* >
*Recurring team/JF meetings* > *rest*.

## 1-on-1s

These meetings are for *you*. There are times where these meetings diverge
towards status updates. I try to keep an eye on this and not let this happen too
often. If it does, remind me. In this meeting we need to talk about you, your
concerns, progress and topics that keep you from me getting the best work you
can do. Sometimes these meetings are fun but sometimes they are tough
conversations.

There are a few resources for having effective 1-on-1 meetings. [This][2] is a
good general overview on effective 1-on-1s. Claire Lew [shows][3] how the 4 most
common questions in the 1-on-1 are actually not getting to the heart of the
topic. She also gives advice on what to ask and talk about instead. If you see
me getting lost in these high-level questions, please remind me.

Finally, but first really, Lara Hogan has a beautiful list of questions for the
very [first, inaugural 1-on-1][4]. I started to go through this list with people
joining the company, If we know each other for a longer time and have not gone
through them, we should definitely do this now.

### My answers to the first 1-on-1 questions

#### What makes you grumpy?

Usually I would say that it is hard to get me really grumpy. Being dishonest is
a clear trigger for me.

#### How do you prefer to receive recognition? (public or private)

I mostly strive for private recognition. I do accept though that sometimes
giving recognition publicly is required. You will see me getting nervous though
and maybe a little shy, having a red face.

#### What are your goals for this year? And for the next 3 months?

I am new in this role and I am learning every day. My primary goal is to not
suck at this so bad that you feel not supported. Usually it's my fault and I am
totally ok with it. In the next three months focus for me will be to prepare
everyone for the next Zonar round. I want to minimize surprises and manage your
expectations.

Another challenge I see is how we evolve the Search organization after 2018, how
we deal with the new responsibilities and new collaborations that need to be
established.

#### Human learning and growth requires the right amount of four things: new challenges, low ego, space to reflect and brainstorm, and timely and clear feedback. How are these four going for you? Is there one you need more or less of?

As I wrote above, I am a learner. I am always seeking new challenges and new
learning experiences. I prefer timely and clear feedback and sometimes need some
time to reflect. Whenever I am in some of those stages, it will be obvious to
you or I will make sure it's clear.

#### Whatâ€™s your favorite baked good?

[Carrot cake][5]

## Work-life balance

I am married, partly own a house and have two kids (7 and 4). Work-life
balance is very important to me as usually my family has priority over
everything else. For this reason I hope you also take care of a healthy
balance. Only when you are able to focus on your work, we can minimize
mistakes and maximize results.

I believe that work-life and your private life always happens in waves. There
are times at work, where it is required to go the extra mile. These times are
challenging, exhaustive but also full of energy. At Zalando one usually sees
this during Black Friday/Cyber Week and it's preparations. But there are other
times that require special focus: roll-outs of new features, new systems or
refactored ones. After those occasions I am keeping an eye on my personal
recovery and will hold you accountable for yours.

There are also times that require more presence and involvement at home with
your family. Having one myself you will get every possible support from me.
Address this in our 1-on-1 or schedule some dedicated time for this.

Finally, at the end of the day, Zalando usually pays you and me for 40 hours.
Not more, not less. There will be weeks where you work more, I do try to keep
an eye on you working less afterwards but you are also accountable for this
yourself.


[1]: https://www.16personalities.com/esfp-personality
[2]: https://getlighthouse.com/blog/effective-1-on-1-meetings/
[3]: https://m.signalvnoise.com/the-4-questions-you-should-stop-asking-during-your-one-on-one-meetings-ed7431da11aa
[4]: https://larahogan.me/blog/first-one-on-one-questions/
[5]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carrot_cake
