{:title "Farewell"
 :layout :post}
 
Today marks the final day of one of the greatest team experiences I've ever had
in my entire professional life. This is not meant to marginalize other teams
I've worked in or people I've worked with. The last roughly 18 months have been
exceptional to me so I'd like to do a short recap of what happened, why the
experience was so great for me, why we ended up in this mess now and what my
personal key take-aways are. This *summary* is purely based on personal
perception, might be totally off or just be the result of my own personal
misjudgment.

## The Setting

Before joining Zalando I was working in a small startup. I was the third
employee and bluntly take some of the credit for their success. After almost
five years in that company I felt almost burned out, expectations were not met
and simply said I did not feel as energized for the company and the team as I
was before.

Me leaving the company overlapped with the birth of my second born daughter.
Living in Germany this means, you are eligible for **Elterngeld**. Essentially
this means the government pays some amount of money so you can take care of your
child and not go to work. For me this was the perfect time for a *reboot*,
taking a step back, reflecting on what has happened and what my goals are.

## Joinging Zalando

Initially my application to Zalando was meant as a test. At this point I was out
of *job-life* for almost 8 months. I enjoyed taking care of my kids and was
happy with it. But I somehow felt that I should get into the *rythm* again and
needed to test where I'm at. Back then I knew people working there and obviously
those are the people to talk to first. I learned that they are planning to
rebuild the search, which is exactly **my thing**

So after the initial, informal talks I applied and from there on it took roughly
two weeks to get an offer. Financially it was pretty good, the challenge seemed
compelling and those I already knew were interesting enough. I applied for other
positions but none matched the combination of being interesting enough and
financially rewarding.

## Initial Setup

After joining it took some time for me to end up in the team responsible for the
core components of the Zalando Search. The team back then was largely built from
*very* experienced backend engineers. But, those of you who have worked in
**Search** know: Search is different. It's hard to explain and this should maybe
be part of a separate write-up. I started explaining why the way they have
envisioned the initial setup is *difficult*. The main painpoint I identified
back then was a custom built **intake** to the search index. It was roughly
working on Kafka-like semantics without using *Kafka*. The whole process was
very error prone and using many of the available (and expensive) AWS features
like: DynamoDB, SQS and S3 (yes, S3 is not expensive; but only as long as you
are reading, writing costs).

So I presented my initial ideas of re-working the *intake* using only Kafka.
Early on I demonstrated how leveraging Kafka might allow us to enable other
teams in the company to contribute to Search, without making the Core Search
team the bottleneck. Simply put: given a very small and limited set of
requirements we were/are able to onboard anyone's data/improvement without
coding too much.

Albeit my good intentions, this was not really kicking off. It took until three
new team members joined, until things really kicked off.

## The Team

After all this the real team was formed. And we stormed. Boy did we storm. The
difference to other teams though was: we had a mutual understanding of what
*Search* meant to **us**. We fought about many details. We fought about Kafka,
Solr, Lucene, Elasticsearch. We really went down the **rabbit hole**.

For me personally the one defining moment was the last day before my winter
vacation 2017, early February. I've been arguing for a while about why we should
simply use Kafka as our basis of integration. All the technical semantics of
Kafka would eventually pay-off for us. Another colleague of mine was not
convinced. The argument went on for some time and on that day I was ready to
**give up**. Maybe his arguments were better and made more sense. Maybe I was
wrong. During the evening he explained to me (via chat) why his solution was
superior to mine. He went on for a while. Eventually I said that he was just
re-building Kafka and that it was late. We kind of split, and that was it.

The next day I turned up in the office. I was sure that this being my last day
at the office, things would just **evolve**. I only asked him for one final
drawing of how he envisioned his implementation. While I was working on
something else, he started drawing on the wall behind my back. I did not really
pay attention at this time. Then he turned to me, tapping on my shoulder. He was
half done with his drawing. Removed all of it and said: **you are right**.
